TWO SIMILAR CRIMES.
TWO DEFENDANTS.
ALL RISE.
BEFORE THE SAME JUDGE.
I HAD NEVER SEEN SUCH AN
OBVIOUS DISPARITY IN SENTENCING
THAT MAY HAVE BEEN BASED ON
RACE.
TWO DIFFERENT SENTENCES.
DON'T MAKE MY RED FLAG GO UP
WITH A DIFFERENT RECOMMENDATION
FOR A WHITE DEFENDANT.
QUESTIONS OF FAIRNESS.
DO YOU THINK THE JUDGE CALLED
YOU A RACIST OR CALLED YOUR AFS
RACIST?
YES.
DON'T TAKE CASE OUT OF 25,000
THAT WE DO EVERY YEAR, LOOK AT
JUST THE RACE OF THE DEFENDANTS
AND DRAW A CONCLUSION THAT THIS
WAS BASED ON RACE.
THAT'S WRONG.
TONIGHT, WE KNOW JUSTICE IS
SUPPOSED TO BE COLOR BLIND, BUT
IS IT?
AMERICA IN BLACK AND WHITE.
IF YOU REDUCE THIS ISSUE TO
ITS MOST ELEMENTARY LEVEL, IT
BOILS DOWN TO A SIMPLE QUESTION
WITH TWO POSSIBLE AND EQUALLY
NASTY ANSWERS.
WHY IS IT THAT THE NUMBER OF
BLACK AND HISPANIC PEOPLE IN
PRISON IS OUT OF ALL PROPORTION
TO THEIR PERCENTAGE IN THE
OVERALL POPULATION?
THAT'S THE QUESTION.
EITHER YOU WOULD HAVE TO
CONCLUDE THAT THEY COMMIT MORE
CRIMES THAN WHITES DO OR THERE
IS SOME QUIRK IN OUR LEGAL
SYSTEM THAT WORKS AGAINST PEOPLE
OF COLOR.
IT MAY BE A FUNCTION OF WEALTH
AND POVERTY.
RICH PEOPLE, CAN AFFORD BETTER
LAWYERS OR LAWYERS THAT WILL
SPEND MORE TIME CRAFTING A
DEFENSE.
POOR DEFENDANTS, MEANWHILE, ARE
OFTEN DEPENDENT ON
COURT-APPOINTED LAWYERS WHO HAVE
TO HANDLE SO MANY CASES THAT
THEY CAN'T DEVOTE MUCH TIME TO
ANY OF THEM.
THE ONLY THING THAT'S EVEN
RELATIVELY NEW ABOUT ANY OF THIS
IS MANDATORY SENTENCING.
IT WAS DESIGNED TO ENSURE THAT
THE SAME CRIME WOULD BE PUNISHED
WITH THE SAME SENTENCE, NO
MATTER WHO THE DEFENDANT IS.
BUT MANDATORY SENTENCING MAY
LIMIT THE OPTIONS JUDGES HAVE.
IT DOES NOT TIE THE HANDS OF
PROSECUTORS.
PROSECUTORS CAN CHOOSE OR NOT
CHOOSE TO OFFER A PLEA BARGAIN
TO A DEFENDANT.
AND THAT CAN DEPEND ON ANY
NUMBER OF VARIABLES, INCLUDING
RACE.
THAT, AT LEAST, IS WHAT ONE
MASSACHUSETTS JUDGE DETERMINED
IN A COUPLE OF CASES THAT CAME
BEFORE HIM.
HERE'S "NIGHTLINE" CORRESPONDENT
MICHELLE MARTIN.
ARE YOU UNDER THE INFLUENCE
OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS AT THIS
POINT?
ANSWER THE QUESTION.
Reporter: MAYBE IT'S
REMARKABLE IN ITSELF, THAT AMID
THE STEADY CASES PASSING THROUGH
THIS COURTROOM --
OPERATION OF A MOTORCYCLE,
HAVING NO INSPECTION STICKER.
BY CONCEALING MERCHANDISE.
Reporter: REPRESENTING EVERY
KIND OF MISSTEP AND MISERY.
THAT ANY ONE CASE OR DEFENDANT
STOOD OUT.
BUT LAST SUMMER, ONE DID.
YES, COUNSEL.
Reporter: ACTUALLY, IT WAS
TWO.
FIRST CAME BERTRAND LAMITIE.
HE WAS ACCUSED OF SELLING CRACK
TO A POLICE INFORMANT.
IN EXCHANGE FOR A GUILTY PLEA,
PROSECUTORS WANTED HIM, A
FIRST-TIME OFFENDER, TO SPEND
SIX MONTHS OF A TWO-YEAR
SENTENCE IN JAIL.
I LOOKED AT THE RECORD.
I SAW HE HAD NO RECORD.
I TOOK THE OPPORTUNITY TO TRY TO
PERSUADE THE DRAE NOT TO
RECOMMEND A COMMITTED SENTENCE.
IT TOOK US ALMOST FOUR
HEARINGS FOR THE JUDGE TO
FINALLY ACCEPT IT.
THE JUDGE KEPT COMING BACK TO
THE PROSECUTION SAYING, ISN'T
THERE SOMETHING WE CAN DO?
THEY WOULD NOT BUDGE.
THEY GAVE UP THE FIGHT AND I
SAID, OKAY, IT'S TIME FOR THE
DRUG DEALER TO GO TO JAIL.
ON THE DAY THAT I SENTENCED HIM,
I HAD NO REMORSE ABOUT
SENTENCING HIM.
Reporter: UNTIL THE DAY THAT
HE BEGAN SERVING HIS SENTENCE,
THE SAME DAY THAT THE JUDGE GOT
THE CASE OF JARED CEDRONE.
POLICE SAY THEY SAW HIM TRYING
TO BUY PILLS AND SEARCHED HIM
AND FOUND COCAINE.
PROSECUTORS ALSO OFFERED HIM A
DEAL ON A TWO-YEAR SENTENCE.
THE D.A. MAKES HER
RECOMMENDATION.
IT'S MORE PROBATION.
I SAID LET ME LOOK AT HIS
RECORD.
I LOOKED AT HIS RECORD AND I SAW
THREE ORE DRUG OFFENSES.
I SAW HIM STIFFEN UP A LITTLE
BIT AND HE INQUIRED OF THE
DISTRICT ATTORNEY, WHAT MAKES
THIS CASE DIFFERENT THAN THE ONE
THAT CAME BEFORE ME YESTERDAY?
IT WAS BECAUSE HE HAD POWDER
COCAINE IN HIS POSSESSION.
HE WAS NOT OBSERVED SELLING THE
COCAINE.
I SAID THAT DIDN'T WORK FOR ME.
Reporter: BECAUSE, AS
SINGLETON SAW IT, THE MAIN
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO MEN
IS THAT ONE IS BLACK, ONE IS
WHITE.
IN A MOVE THAT ROCKED THE
COURTHOUSE, THE JUDGE ORDERED
THE D.A.'S OFFICE TO PROVIDE AND
EXPLANATION SAYING --
I HAD NEVER SEEN SUCH A
OBVIOUS DISPARITY IN SENTENCING
THAT MAY HAVE BEEN BASED ON
RACE.
I HAD NOT BEEN LOOKING FOR IT.
IT JUST FELL IN MY LAP.
DON'T TAKE TWO CASES OUT OF
45,000 THAT WE DEAL WITH EVERY
SINGLE YEAR, LOOK AT JUST THE
RACE OF THE DEFENDANTS AND DRAW
A CONCLUSION THAT THIS WAS BASED
ON RACE.
THAT'S WRONG.
Reporter: MARTHA COAKLEY IS
THE MIDDLESEX DISTRICT ATTORNEY.
WE WANT BACK TO EACH
ASSISTANT DISTRICT ATTORNEY.
THESE CASES WERE HANDLED BY
DIFFERENT PEOPLE.
THEY LOOKED AT THEM BASED ON THE
WAY, THE FACTORS WE LOOK AT FOR
RECOMMENDATIONS.
Reporter: CHIEF AMONG THE
FACTORS, SAID COAKLEY IN HER
RESPONSE, IS THAT THE D.A.'S
OFFICE SAW LAMITIE AS A DEALER.
AND WHILE CEDRONE HAD MULTIPLE
CRIMES, THAT CLEARLY AND ONLY
INDICATE USING STATUS.
HOW DID YOU PERSUADE THE COURT
THAT HE REALLY WAS A USER AND
NEEDED TREATMENT?
I THINK THE COURT PERSONNEL
DID A LOT OF THE WORK FOR ME.
HE HAD A PROBATION OFFICER WHO
SAW THAT WAS A YOUNG GUY WITH A
PROBLEM AND NEEDED TO ADDRESS
THE PROBLEM.
HE ALSO HAD SUPPORTIVE PARENTS.
THAT PLAYS A BIG ROLE.
HIS PARENTS REALLY WANTED HIM TO
GET SOME TREATMENT.
Reporter: AND YOU ALSO ARGUE
THAT MR. LAMITIE SHOULD ALSO
HAVE BEEN VIEWED AS A USER AND
NOT A DEALER.
WHY?
THAT'S THE SITUATION.
HE STARTED IN HIGH SCHOOL USING
ALCOHOL AND DRUGS.
AND HE GOT AROUND INTO THE WRONG
CROWD.
AND I THOUGHT HE SHOULD TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF A FIRST OFFENDERS
PROGRAM.
I WROTE THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY
THAT LETTER.
THEY HAD THAT KNOWLEDGE WAY
BEFORE THIS PARTICULAR CASE CAME
TO PLEA BARGAIN.
Reporter: DO YOU THINK THEY
TOOK THAT INFORMATION INTO
ACCOUNT?
THEY DISCOUNTED EVERY BIT OF
IT.
WE HAD MORE THAN ENOUGH
EVIDENCE TO CONVICT THIS
INDIVIDUAL.
THERE WAS NOTHING ON HIS RECORD
OR, INDEED, WHAT THE DEFENSE
COUNSEL SAID THAT WHAT HE REALLY
HAD WAS JUST A DRUG PROBLEM
RATHER THAN A DRUG-SELLING
PROBLEM.
Reporter: HE HAS A LETTER
WHERE HE SAYS THE GUY HAS A DRUG
AND ALCOHOL PROBLEM.
ARE YOU SAYING HE DIDN'T DISCUSS
IT IN HIS ORAL COMMUNICATIONS OR
DIDN'T EMPHASIZE IT ENOUGH?
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT WAS
NOT A MAJOR FACTOR IN
NEGOTIATING A PLEA.
Reporter: IF I COULD ASK THIS
WITHOUT OFFENDING YOU, IS IT
POSSIBLE THAT THE OTHER
DEFENDANT HAD A BETTER LAWYER?
THE SAME LAWYER WITH THE SAME
SET OF FACTS GOT A BETTER
OUTCOME.
BECAUSE HE WAS A WHITE
LAWYER?
Reporter: I DON'T KNOW.
THIS IS THE TYPE OF ARGUMENT
THAT MANY PEOPLE MAKE WHEN A
BLACK LAWYER REPRESENTS A BLACK
DEFENDANT.
AND WE GET A RESULT LESS THAN A
WHITE LAWYER.
WHAT WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND IS
THAT, EVEN AS WE REPRESENT BLACK
DEFENDANTS, WE ARE REQUESTING
THAT JUSTICE BE DONE AND IT BE
EQUAL, REGARDLESS OF THE COLOR
OF THE LAWYER.
Reporter: DO YOU THINK YOU
WOULD HAVE GOTTEN THE SAME
RESULT IF YOU HAD A BLACK
CLIENT?
I LIKE TO THINK SO, YEAH.
I ADVOCATED HARD FOR HIM.
WRAPPING UP THE CASES IN OTHER
COURTS.
AND THE GOAL ALWAYS WAS TO GET
HIM INTO TREATMENT,
COURT-ORDERED TREATMENT.
Reporter: IF CEDRONE WAS JUST
A USER, SAYS THE JUDGE, WHY HE
WAS CHARGED AS A SELLER?
WHY DID THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY
LET HIM, REQUIRE HIM, TO PLEAD
GUILTY TO POSSESSION WITH INTENT
TO DISTRIBUTE, IF THE DISTRICT
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE REALLY
BELIEVED THAT?
THEY DON'T BELIEVE THAT.
Reporter: AT LEAST THE JUDGE
DID NOT BELIEVE THAT.
IN ANOTHER UNUSUAL STEP, HE
VACATED MR. LAMITIE'S SENTENCE,
REKUZED HIMSELF OF THE CASE AND
CALLED FOR AN OUTSIDE STUDY OF
THE D.A.'S HANDLING OF NARCOTICS
CASES INVOLVING MINORITIES.
IT'S WORTH TALKING ABOUT.
I HAVEN'T SAID THAT.
BUT I NEED SOME PATTERN OR
EVIDENCE HERE THAT TELLS ME THAT
THERE'S SOMETHING THAT I CAN DO.
Reporter: BUT MAYBE WHAT
ANGERED THE D.A. THE MOST WAS
WHAT SHE THOUGHT THE JUDGE WAS
REALLY SAYING.
DO YOU THINK THE JUDGE CALLED
YOU A RACIST?
YES.
Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT'S
WHAT HAPPENED HERE?
YES.
Reporter: WHY DO YOU THINK
THAT?
THAT'S WHAT HE SAID.
THAT'S WHAT HIS ORDER SAYS.
Reporter: I DON'T BELIEVE I
SAW THAT IN THAT STATEMENT.
I HAVE IT HERE.
WE CAN BOTH LOOK AT IT.
HE BELIEVES THE ONLY DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THESE TWO CASES WAS
RACE.
THEN YOU HAVE TO DRAW -- THE
NEXT STEP IS TO CONCLUDE THAT IT
WAS A RACIST RECOMMENDATION.
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT THAT I
HAVE RUN INTO PEOPLE THAT I
COULD SAY -- I COULD PUT MY HAND
ON THEIR SHOULDER AND SAY, BOB,
YOU ARE A RACIST.
I HAVEN'T RUN INTO THAT.
I CANNOT SAY THAT.
Reporter: SO, WHAT CAN YOU
SAY?
I CAN SAY THAT RACISM
PERMEATES THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM AND WE ALL NEED TO DO
BETTER IN TERMS OF IDENTIFYING
IT AND HOPEFULLY ROOT IT OUT.
Reporter: WHAT RESPONSE HAVE
YOU GOTTEN TO THE STANCE YOU'VE
TAKEN IN THIS CASE?
IT'S BEEN OVERWHELMING
BETWEEN PEOPLE CALLING, PEOPLE
WRITING, JUDGES WHO CORNERED ME
IN THE HALLWAY OR DIFFERENT
COURTROOMS SAYING GREAT JOB,
GLAD SOMEONE'S TAKING A STAND.
IT NEEDED TO GO PUBLIC.
Reporter: PERHAPS NOT
SURPRISINGLY.
THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY SEES VERY
DIFFERENTLY.
I DON'T SEE EVIDENCE TO
SUPPORT HIS CONCLUSION.
I DON'T SEE ANYBODY ELSE IN THIS
COURTHOUSE WHO ALSO SEES WHAT WE
DO EVERY SINGLE DAY, SUPPORTING
HIS CONCLUSION.
Reporter: AS FOR MR. LAMITE,
THE BLACK DEFENDANT, A SECOND
JUDGE TOOK THE CASE.
LAMITE AR AGAIN PLEADED GUILTY
AND AGREED TO THE SAME SENTENCE.
MR. CEDRONE, THE WHITE DEFENDANT
WHO RECEIVED NO JAIL TIME IS NOW
BEING SOUGHT IN CONNECTION WITH
A PROBATION VIOLATION ON ONE OF
HIS PREVIOUS CONVICTIONS.
HOW WIDE SPLED ARE RACIAL
DISPARITIES IN THE COURTROOM?
THAT IN PART TWO OF MICHELLE
MARTIN'S REPORT WHEN WE COME
BACK.
THE UNEQUAL TREATMENT THAT
JUDGE SINGLETON BELIEVES EXISTED
IN HIS COURTROOM IS PART OF WHAT
SOME BELIEVE TO BE A WIDER
TREND.
ONCE AGAIN, HERE'S "NIGHTLINE"
CORRESPONDENT MICHELLE MART REN.
ALL RISE.
Reporter: AS IT HAPPENS,
JUDGE SINGLETON IS NOT THE ONLY
ONE TO NOTICE WHAT APPEAR TO BE
RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN
SENTENCING.
FIVE YEARS AGO, THIS IS WHAT
DISTRICT COURT JUDGE SYDNEY
HANLON SAW IN HER COURTROOM.
I SAW A CASE WITH A YOUNG
WHITE MAN WORKING A MINIMUM WAGE
JOB, CHARGED WITH SIMPLE
POSSESSION, POSSESSION ONLY OF
$375 WORTH OF MARIJUANA.
AND IT SEEMED TO ME THAT, UNLESS
THERE WERE FACTORS I DIDN'T KNOW
ABOUT, SOMEONE FROM THE URBAN
COURT, THAT I WORK IN, SOMEONE
WHO LIVES IN THIS COMMUNITY, FOR
THE MOST PART, PEOPLE OF COLOR,
WOULD HAVE BEEN CHARGED WITH
INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE.
Reporter: SO, JUDGE HANLON
ASKED RESEARCHERS FROM A LOCAL
UNIVERSITY TO COME TO HER
COURTHOUSE AND SEE IF HER HUNCH
WAS CORRECT.
THE SMALL STUDY THEY DID RAISED
CONCERN THAT THE BOSTON POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND THE D.A.'S OFFICE
AGREED TO PARTAKE IN A WIDER
STUDY.
BUT SOMETHING INVOLVING RACE IS
GOING ON AROUND THE COUNTRY.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE MASSACHUSETTS
SENTENCING COMMISSION SURVEY OF
SENTENCING PRACTICES FOR THE
YEAR 2000 SHOWED THAT 63% OF
THOSE CONVICTED OF CRIMES WERE
WHITE.
WHITES WERE HALF OF THOSE
CONVICTED OF DRUG OFFENSES.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO MINIMUM
SENTENCES, ONLY 20% OF THOSE
WERE WHITE AND 80% FOR BLACK OR
HISPANIC.
THE IMPORTANT QUESTION IS WHY?
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
STATISTICS MEAN.
THEY CAN MEAN A LOT OF THINGS.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT EITHER I OR
ANY OTHER D.A. HAS A RACIST
POLICY OF SENTENCING.
Reporter: DOES IT HAVE TO BE
THAT?
DOES IT HAVE TO BE A RACIST
POLICY OR NO PROBLEM AT ALL?
NO.
Reporter: IS THERE SOME
ALTERNATE EXPLANATION THAT MIGHT
BE OF INTEREST?
SURE.
AND I'D LOVE TO HEAR WHAT JUDGE
SINGLETON'S FOCUS ON THE PROBLEM
OR CONCERN OF WHAT IT IS.
Reporter: JUDGE SINGLETON
SUGGESTED THAT THE TREND TOWARD
MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCES
MIGHT BE PART OF THE PROBLEM.
IN MASSACHUSETTS, FOR EXAMPLE,
SELLING DRUGS WITHIN 1,000 FEET
OF A SCHOOL TRIGGERS A MANDATORY
SENTENCE.
THERE MIGHT BE A SCHOOL ON EVERY
OTHER BLOCK.
MANDATORY MINIMUMS WERE SUPPOSED
TO IMPART MORE FAIRNESS.
THAT HAS NOT HAPPENED.
AND WHAT THEY DID WAS THEY PUT
IT IN THE HANDS OF THE
PROSECUTORS.
Reporter: WITH A MANDATORY
SENTENCE HANGING OVER A
PROSECUTOR'S HEAD, PROSECUTORS
HAVE MORE REV REJ TO PROD A
DEFENDANT TOWARD A GUILTY PLEA.
PROSECUTORS FROM ANY GOOD
REASONS DON'T CHARGE PEOPLE.
THEY DECIDE SOMEBODY'S GOING TO
SCHOOL.
SOMEBODY HAS NO RECORD.
SOMEBODY IS COOPERATING WITH
THEM AND PROVIDING THEM
INFORMATION.
ALL GOOD REASONS TO GIVE
SOMEBODY A BREAK.
BUT THERE'S -- THEY'RE STILL
MAKING THE SAME KIND OF
DECISIONS THAT JUDGES MAKE, ONLY
THEY'RE MAKING THEM IN PRIVATE.
WHEN I DO IT, IT'S ON A TAPE.
I HAVE TO WRITE IT DOWN.
Reporter: OF COURSE, JUDGES
DON'T HAVE TO ACCEPT THE PLEA
AGREEMENTS OFFERED AND CAN HAVE
BIASES OF THEIR OWN.
THERE'S ALWAYS A MERE YAD OF
FACTORS AS TO WHY PEOPLE GET
SENTENCED.
I THINK IT IS TRUE THAT, YOU
KNOW, PEOPLE WHO ARE OF A HIGHER
ECONOMIC GROUP, AND THAT TENDS
TO BE WHITES RATHER THAN BLACKS,
WILL COME IN WITH GOOD LAWYERS
AND GOOD REPRESENTATION AND A
STRONGER FAMILY STRUCTURE.
THAT'S AN UNFAIR, PERHAPS,
IMPACT.
BUT THAT'S BECAUSE OF POVERTY.
THAT'S NOT BECAUSE OF RACE.
AND RACE IS INVOLVED IN THAT AND
IT GETS COMPLICATED.
Reporter: IT IS HARD TO TALK
ABOUT RACE.
THAT'S ONE OF THE FEW THINGS
THAT EVERYBODY INVOLVED IN THIS
DISCUSSION AGREED ON.
I FIND THAT WHEN YOU TRY TO
SAY WE NEED TO LOOK AT THE
RACIAL IMPLICATIONS ON THAT,
THERE ARE MANY WHITE PEOPLE WHO
ARE OFFENDED AND THE DISCUSSION
STOPS.
Reporter: LAST WEEK, FIVE
MONTHS AFTER THE WAR OF WORDS
BEGAN, DISTRICT ATTORNEY MARTHA
COAKLEY AND JUDGE SINGLETON
FINALLY SAT DOWN TO HAVE THEIR
TALK.
THIS IS MICHEL MARTIN, FOR
"NIGHTLINE" IN WASHINGTON.
IS A COLOR BLIND JUSTICE
SYSTEM EVEN POSSIBLE?
MY GUEST TONIGHT IS CHARLES
OGLETREE, PROFESSOR OF LAW AT
HARVARD UNIVERSITY.
HE JOINS US TONIGHT FROM OUR
PORTLAND AFFILIATE, KATU.
IS THIS, PROFESSOR OGLETREE, A
GOOD CASE TO MAKE THE POINT THAT
NEEDS TO BE MADE?
IT'S A GREAT CASE, TED.
CAR NELL WEST HAD A PHRASE IN A
BOOK CALLED "RACE MATTERS."
IT TELLS US THAT RACE DOES
MATTER.
TWO PEOPLE ARE TREATED
DIFFERENTLY BECAUSE OF RACE.
YOU CAN DEBATE THE FACTS.
DEBATE THE LAW, THE SIX.
BUT IT BOILS DOWN TO
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN AND A WHITE
DEFENDANT FEEL AND THEIR LAWYERS
FEEL THEY WERE TREATED
DIFFERENTLY IN THE SAME JUSTICE
SYSTEM BECAUSE OF THEIR RACE.
THE PROSECUTOR, AS YOU HEARD,
DISAGREES VEHEMENTLY.
SHE SAYS NOT SO AND HOW DO YOU
PROVE SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO PROVE IN
MANY CASES.
BUT STUDY AFTER STUDY HAVE TOLD
US THAT STATE, FEDERAL, LOCAL
AND NATIONAL, THAT
AFRICAN-AMERICAN AND HISPANIC
DEFENDANTS ARE TREATED
DIFFERENTLY IN OUR CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM.
IT'S LARGELY BECAUSE OF THE
SENTENCING GUIDELINES ENACTED IN
THE 1980s, GIVING PROSECUTORS A
LOT OF DISCRETION IN DECIDING
WHO IS CHARGED WITH WHAT
OFFENSE.
AND THAT HAS A BIG IMPACT ON THE
OVERREPRESENTATION OF
AFRICAN-AMERICANS IN THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM.
WAS IT BETTER WHEN THE JUDGES
HAD THE DISCRETION AND THE
PROSECUTORS HAD LESS?
IT WAS BETTER AND WORSE.
BETTER BECAUSE JUDGES COULD TAKE
INTO CONSIDERATION CERTAIN
ASPECTS OF A SUSPECT'S OR
DEFENDANT'S BACKGROUND AND USE
THAT AS MITIGATION TO LIGHTEN
THE SENTENCE.
IT WAS WORSE BECAUSE JUDGES,
LIKE ANY PERSON, WERE FALLIBLE.
AND THEY COULD MAKE JUDGMENTS
THAT WERE WRONG.
AND THEY COULD USE UNCONSCIOUS
RACISM TO SAY A PERSON FROM A
POOR FAMILY IS NOT GOING TO DO
WELL SO MAYBE PRISON WOULD DO
THEM WELL.
SO, THE IDEA WAS TO IMPROVE THE
SYSTEM.
BUT THE SENTENCING GUIDELINES
LED TO SUBSTANTIALLY MORE PEOPLE
IN PRISON.
MORE THAN 2 MILLION IN AMERICA
TODAY.
THOSE NUMBERS HAVE ACCELERATED.
THERE ARE MORE PEOPLE IN PRISON
NOW UNDER THE CLINTON WATCH THAN
THERE WERE UNDER BUSH'S WATCH OR
ANY OTHER PRESIDENT IN MODERN
TIMES.
IT'S NOT WHETHER YOU'RE A
REPUBLICAN OR DEMOCRAT OR BLACK
OR WHITE OR RICH OR POOR.
IT'S SIMPLY THAT WE HAVE BEEN
VERY TOUGH ON CRIME.
WE HAVE BEEN RELENTLESS IN
PURSUING PEOPLE, EVEN NONVIOLENT
DRUG OFFENDERS AND OUR JAILS ARE
OVERFLOWING.
IT'S A PROBLEM THAT HAS TO HAVE
A LEGISLATIVE AND POLITICAL
SOLUTION.
IF YOU SAY IT'S NOT
IDEOLOGICAL AND SURELY OF THE
MANY CRITICISMS THAT MAY HAVE
BEEN AND CAN BE DIRECTED AGAINST
PRESIDENT CLINTON, EVEN A
SUGGESTION OF RACISM HAS NEVER
BEEN AMONG THEM.
WHY WOULD THAT BE THE CASE THEN?
BECAUSE, WHEN YOU PRESIDE
OVER THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
AS THE CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIAL IN THE FEDERAL LEVEL,
AND YOU ENCOURAGE AND SUPPORT
CONGRESSIONAL POLICIES THAT ARE
MORE EMOTIONAL THAN REFLECTIVE
OF A THOUGHTFUL ANALYSIS AND
DEBATE AND DISCUSSION, YOU END
UP WITH PEOPLE BEING SENT TO
JAIL FOR OFFENSES THAT DO NOT
REQUIRE JAIL.
A LOT OF PEOPLE WENT TO JAIL FOR
CRACK COCAINE IN 1980.
THEY COME OUT WITH NO EDUCATION.
NO FAMILY.
NO EMPLOYMENT SKILLS.
NO HOPE.
AND WE EXPECT THEM NOT TO THE --
IT'S NOT FIXING THE SYSTEM.
I'M SAYING WHAT CAN YOU POINT
TO THAT DEMONSTRATES BEYOND ANY
SHADOW OF A DOUBT THAT THE
SYSTEM IS INTENTIONALLY OR
OTHERWISE RACIST.
THIS IS THE CLASSIC CASE.
FIRST OF ALL, CRACK COCAINE AND
POWDER COCAINE ARE BOTH COCAINE.
AND YET, BECAUSE OF THE REACTION
TO WHAT HAPPENED IN THE EARLY
1980s, WITH THE SPREAD OF CRACK
COCAINE, IN URBAN AREAS, WE CAME
UP WITH PENALTIES TO MAKE THOSE
WHO HAD CRACK COCAINE FACE
PENALTIES THAT WERE 100-TIMES AS
SEVERE OF THOSE WITH POWDER
COCAINE.
SAME DRUG.
SAME CIRCUMSTANCES, PENALTIES
MASSIVELY KIMPBT.
AND MANY OF THE
AFRICAN-AMERICANS WHO ARE
INCARCERATED TODAY FROM THE
1980s ARE PEOPLE THAT WERE USING
CRACK COCAINE, EVEN THOUGH THE
VAST MAJORITY OF COCAINE USERS
WERE WHITE AND THE PENALTIES
WERE NOT THE SAME.
THE PENALTIES ARE DIFFERENT.
THEY HAVE A RACIAL IMPACT.
WE'RE DOWN TO OUR LAST FEW
SECONDS.
LET ME REPOSE THE QUESTION I
POSED AT THE BEGINNING OF THE
BROADCAST.
AND SOME SAY MAY MORE BLACKS ARE
IN JAIL THAN WHITES BECAUSE MORE
BLACKS CHIT CRIME.
THAT'S NOT TRUE.
MOST CRIME AND DRUG USE IS BY
WHITES.
BLACKS ARE TARGETED BECAUSE
THEY'RE IN URBAN AREAS.
THEY'RE IN AN OPEN MARKET.
WE'RE NOT SEARCHING THE LOCKERS
AT HARVARD LAW SCHOOL.
WE'RE NOT SEARCHING THE
PENTHOUSES ON WALL STREET.
DRUG ABUSE IS PERVASIVE, WITHOUT
REGARD TO RACE.
BUT THE DEPLOYMENT OF POLICE
OFFICERS IS FOCUS ON THE URBAN
COMMUNITIES.
I'M NOT SAYING WE TOLERATE IT OR
IT SHOULD BE CONDONED I'M SAYING
LET'S BE FAIR AND EQUAL.
EQUAL JUSTICE IS WHAT WE ASK
FOR.
IF WE HAVE THAT, THERE'S NO
REASON TO COMPLAIN.
AND THAT'S OUR REPORT FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M TED KOPPEL IN WASHINGTON.